---
title: Emily Oomen
categories: [Personal Stories]
---

I have been dealing with social anxiety since I was twelve years old. When my
anxiety first began to overwhelm me, I was ashamed to seek help and ask my
parents to take me to a therapist. I believe this shame stemmed from the stigma
tied to mental health in America because in the United States, it is seen as
taboo if someone goes to therapy. However, as time passed, after having many
panic attacks and struggling to socialize, enough was enough, and I realized
that it was more of a battle to try enduring anxiety than to muster up the
courage to seek out help. I finally was brave enough to ask my mom for help and
tell her about my anxiety, and afterwards, I felt as though a huge, hundred
pound weight had been lifted off my chest. Following our discussion of how to
move forward with my anxiety, we decided that I should see a therapist.

I remember being very intimidated when going to my first therapy appointment.
What should I expect  beyond the door of the waiting room? Little did I know at
the time that what was behind that door would change my life for the better. My
first therapy session consisted of a conversation between a therapist and me in
a room with a relaxing atmosphere and comfy furniture. During the appointment
we discussed anxiety, and the therapist gave me advice on how to breathe. Hmm
breathing... that sounds too simple to combat anxiety I thought. I didn’t
really believe, at first, that breathing would help, but I decided to try out
the breathing method my therapist recommended anyway. Surprisingly, taking deep
breaths when I felt an anxiety attack coming on helped phenomenally well. After
seeing the therapist for a little while and working through my anxiety, soon I
was cured of panic attacks.

Anxiety is still a familiar friend that flutters with me everywhere I go. Now,
with the skills and tools I have learned to combat it, my anxiety has lessened
from when I was twelve. I now no longer have panic attacks, and I am confident
enough to cope with flutters of anxiety on my own. If anyone is struggling with
anxiety or any other mental illness, I strongly encourage them to seek out
help. Living in the shadow of a mental illness is no way to live life. You are
meant and deserve to live a healthy joyful life.

