---
title: Brooke Thimmig
category: "your story"
---

When I was 11 years old, my parents divorced, initiating my first heart break
as I lost the perfect family that I had always wanted. My life as I knew it was
forever changed, and I struggled to cope with the overwhelming feelings of
sadness and anxiety that accompanied these alterations. Thankfully, my parents
recognized my fading mental health and put both me and my twin sister into
therapy to learn how to cope with the incredible changes occurring in our
lives. After a year of seeing her, I no longer needed the extra help of my
therapist to get through life, but upon entering high school, my symptoms of
anxiety and depression worsened with the immense pressure I placed on myself to
be the best that I could be.

I was extremely busy in high school, taking all honors and AP classes while
dancing over 20 hours a week outside of school and somehow finding time to
volunteer countless hours at the local animal shelter. In retrospect, I was way
in over my head, and both my mental and physical health at the time were
deteriorating. However, I tried to ignore my feelings for as long as I could
because it seemed as if my peers were just as busy as I was, but instead of
struggling with stress and their insecurities, they were thriving and confident
students both inside and outside of the classroom.

As time progressed, I began to withdrawal from my friends and family. I stopped
raising my hand in class to ask questions and to give answers, even when I knew
I was right for fear of looking stupid, and I always felt like the dumbest
person in the room no matter how great my grades were. I was tired and fatigued
every day, and I was oppressed by this unexplainable and overwhelming feeling
of pain, followed by an enormous sense of guilt for being in such agony when I
had an amazing life compared to others that are less fortunate than I. I
started to despise myself and was terrified by my own thoughts, one of them
being a desire to fall asleep and to never wake up so that all of my problems
would go away. This led to me lashing out at my family and having intense
mental break downs on a nightly basis.

I eventually realized that no one should have to go through the immense
suffering I was experiencing all by themselves when they are surrounded by a
support system of family and friends, so I reached out to my mother and
scheduled an appointment with my therapist. I began seeing my therapist every
week for the rest of my high school years. She helped me regain my confidence,
find myself and my purpose again, and survive through my feelings of
worthlessness and the stressors of high school. I now believe that therapy and
an unhealthy mind aren’t something to be ashamed of but should be embraced and
just as normalized as going to the doctor for an unhealthy body.
