---
title: This New Olympic Sport Needs to Go
author: Brooke Thimmig
categories: [Learn More]
---

Imagine this: after your grueling day of classes, you say to one of your
friends, "I have so much on my plate right now. I have to work on 2 group
projects, read 4 textbook chapters, write a 5-page essay, study for a test,
do 30 math problems, and on top of that, I have to volunteer for a few hours
and go to 2 different club meetings this week."

By sharing your overwhelming workload with your fellow classmate, you were
hoping that they would recognize your stressed mindset and in turn, comfort you
with words of encouragement and reassurance. But what if, like most students
these days, your friend did the opposite? Instead, your friend's response to
your venting is something like this: "That's easy compared to what I have to
do. I need to finish all of the homework that you mentioned, plus another 10
math problems for extra credit all while going to dance lessons and rehearsals
outside of school for 20 hours this week. I have so much more stress because I
have no free time to do the work I have."

Without meaning to, your friend dismissed your very valid feelings of anxiety
and stress by one-upping you with their own enormous, and just as stressful,
to-do list. This contest for the title of having the worst schedule, having the
highest stress levels, and being the most overworked is known as the Stress
Olympics, and it is all too common in high school and college. Not
surprisingly, it originates from our human nature to share and empathize. We
all have experienced genuine and overwhelming distress. When our burdens become
too much for us to bear on our own, we reach out for help from others and they
do the same. However, instead of having the healthy and intended outcome of
sympathy and relief, the Stress Olympics only exacerbate and normalize
excessive stress levels and unhealthy behaviors by creating competition and
anxiety.

Even I am guilty of competing in the Stress Olympics. I have responded to
several of my classmates that have come to me for help with their stressful
feelings by claiming my own problems were more overwhelming and stressful than
theirs, just like what was said by the hypothetical friend I mentioned above.
At the time, I did not realize what I was doing would only make my friends feel
worse. Today I know it is so easy to give in to the Stress Olympics when the
culture in our high schools and colleges is an extremely stressful environment
that encourages competition and cutthroat mindsets. It is always healthier and
more beneficial to listen and comfort those that confide in you instead of
ignoring and trumping their valid feelings.

We must be more aware of when we participate in the Stress Olympics and be able
to recognize how quickly a conversation can turn into a battle. Then, we can
transform the argument into a discussion and steer it towards a more
understanding and healing direction. Let's lift each other up with support and
encouragement instead of tearing each other down with pointless competition. I
don't know about you, but I'd much rather be productive and healthy than win
the gold medal in the Stress Olympics any day.
