---
title: What Causes Stress in Students?
subtitle: Pressure Points, Stressors, and How to Overcome Them
author: Anushka Saxena
categories: [Learn More]
---

The X generation of the 21st century is a world of youngsters working towards
building CVs, having a successful family and love life, and even carrying
multiple society-related responsibilities. Amidst the vehement competition and
hustle-bustle of daily life, losing our way is a common affair. But what is
drastic is losing our *mind*.

Mental Health is recognizably the most important aspect of our well-being and
personality, and it's not just about being exempt from psychological illnesses.
It also involves freedom from the clutches of sadness, worry, stress and other
such unpleasant feelings that result in an adolescents' life due to the
multiple stressors that they are faced with.

Stress is indeed something that can light up the bodily response as if an
electric charge just ran through. It can motivate, energize and even
strengthen. However, this "Eustress" (good stress) may take no time to become
"Distress" (bad stress), and it is this latter manifestation of stress that
devastates. A stressor, if prolonged, can exhaust vital resources, hamper the
immune system and disrupt mental health causing isolation, feelings of
hopelessness, depression, anxiety, and even mania.

Not surprisingly enough, various tests have revealed that a significant number
of adolescents are disposed to a large number of factors and stressors that
cause damage of mental and physical health. A test conducted on a significant
sample of teen school-goers in Karnataka, India revealed that almost 63% of
them experience interpersonal stress and 70% displayed various manifestations
of depression.

They are right to say that school and college are the most important
environments that expose students to both good and bad experiences, activities,
and people, during their crucial teen years. In such a scenario, the most
common stressors faced by school and college goers are peer pressure (for
maintaining standards of trends, for experimenting with drugs or alcohol, for
being of particular shape or size, etc.), fulfilling parental expectations for
good grades, making a stand of self in society, channeling sexual and other
hormonal feelings in the right direction and dealing with crammed schedules,
job pressures and social life.

As a consequence of various school/ peer-based requirements or expectations,
adolescents skip meals, over-eat, sleep late into the night or exert their
bodies beyond capacity. Sadly, it takes them to a path of self-destruction
which involves the deterioration of mental health, physical resources and
behavioral abilities. Symptoms of peer pressure may include teens breaking down
frequently, being anorexic/ bulimic, lashing out in anger often and
experimenting with alcohol, drugs or sexual activities. Similar symptoms follow
stressors faced by adolescents at home, the worst of which is a divorce, death
or financial crisis in the family.

Such circumstances may burden the mind with pangs of panic and anxiety in a way
that mental health of the young adult is immensely disrupted, causing them to
withdraw from school, society and following unhealthy paths. Pressure from
parents to qualify for a university or job, securing top-of-the-class marks,
etc. also drastically impact the way a teen behaves or sustains themselves.
When school-based burdens combine with home-based pressures, it results in a
situation devastating for teenage mental health and physical well-being.
Subsequently, young lives find themselves feeling hopeless, tired, anxious,
depressed and confused.

Immediate attention needs to be given to the mental health of every adolescent
around the world, especially in these increasingly competitive and pressurizing
times.

1. The first key to helping resolve most types of teenage stress involves a
   contribution from parents. Parents have the responsibility and potential to
   understand their children's problems and find solutions and motivations to
   guide their lives. This can be done through friendly conversations, by spending
   quality family time and by teaching teens about how they must create harmony
   with their changing internal (hormonal) and external (social) environments,
   helping them to cope with stress.

2. Teenagers should focus on techniques like progressive muscle relaxation,
   following positivity and discipline, exercising and eating proper meals, making
   achievable schedules and doing creative visualization, and most importantly,
   telling themselves, "I can do this."

3. Indeed, stressors are many and pressure is intense. But it is ultimately about
   time management and understanding of such stress while taking steps to deal
   with said stress that can make our lives better, and perhaps, easier to live
   through.

