---
title: "4 Books that Accurately Describe Mental Illness"
author: Nikita Sasi
editor: Brooke Thimmig
categories: [Blog]
---

Books can do a lot for a person.

They can make you cry, laugh, and even fall in love with characters that are
not real people. Books can also teach you things that you've never even heard
of before. However, books aren't always wonderful, and there's often a
misrepresentation of certain topics and themes within their pages. The subject
of mental health, for instance, is one of the most prominent topics that is
incorrectly displayed in literature.

Mental illness is romanticized and normalized a great deal nowadays. People
barely bat an eyelash at the words "depression" and "anxiety" because of how
much they thrown around, and the severity of these words is unfortunately
lessening.

It saddens me that inaccurate books can change a person's opinion or thoughts
so quickly, so I did some digging. Here are four books which, more or less,
accurately talk about mental illnesses. They're excellent if you're facing a
few problems yourself and are seeking understanding, or if you just want to
learn more about mental health, these books are great for becoming more
educated on the subject.

## The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time

### Mark Haddon

A novel that stole the hearts of many, The Curious Incident of the Dog in the
Night-Time is narrated in the first-person perspective of Christopher Boone, a
15-year-old boy who describes himself as "a mathematician with some behavioral
difficulties".

The reader can immediately recognize that Christopher isn't an average
teenager. His thoughts and behaviors lead readers to believe that he may be on
the autism spectrum, which is in fact the case. A major reason for this novel's
popularity is that despite the fact that Christopher has autism, the author
never lets it be the deciding factor that describes Christopher. He is more
than that; he's a writer, a mathematician, a son, and a traveler.

The author does confirm that Christopher has Asperger's syndrome after the
release of the book, but he has stated that he didn't want to label
Christopher, as each and every individual is different.

The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time is an emotional, frustrating,
yet feel good book that shows readers that a person is much more than their
disorder or illness.

## I'll Give You the Sun

### Jandy Nelson

While the novel doesn't deal with mental issues, I'll Give You the Sun revolves
largely around self identity, which is a relevant problem that most adolescents
face. It doesn't sugar-coat issues faced by teenagers, and it tells it like it
is.

A person's teenage years expose them to numerous things. Adolescence is a
period of retrospection and disasters, where everything is wrong but also
right. Being extremely relatable, the story involves two twins, who fall apart
as they grow older, and the book describes their battles with sexuality,
identity, and the loss of loved ones.

## Looking for Alaska

### John Green

John Green has a reputation for writing Young Adult novels that don't shy away
from matters related to mental health. Looking for Alaska is undoubtedly one of
his darkest novels, despite it being his first. It deals with depression and
problems faced by adolescents, and the book even mentions suicide.

The character named Alaska has experienced childhood trauma, and she often
turns to alcohol and cigarettes, saying "Y'all smoke to enjoy it. I smoke to
die." Although not specified, it's clear to the readers that Alaska isn't in
the best mental state. Looking for Alaska is a great read if you're searching
for a coming-of-age novel about life, love, and teenagehood.

## The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo

### Stieg Larsson

Stieg Larsson earned the highest acclaims after the release of his book, The
Girl with the Dragon Tattoo. Touching almost every 'taboo' topic known, from
violence towards women to mental disorders, Larsson took the plunge no one else
dared to do.

Besides its wonderful mystery and thriller aspects, The Girl with the Dragon
Tattoo is unique for its protagonist, Lisbeth Slander. Although not explicitly
mentioned, it's clear to everyone that she lacks social skills, awareness, and
can even get extremely violent when provoked.

While she does have extraordinary mental skills, her lack of emotional empathy
and connection makes her seemingly hard to love, but that's exactly what makes
her a favorite character- she has flaws.

Although readers conflict with their speculations about the number of illnesses
she may have, including PTSD and Antisocial Personality Disorder, everyone can
agree that she's portrayed wonderfully. Larsson also highlights society's
ignorance and discrimination towards mental illnesses, which is a much needed
wake up call for human beings.

I highly recommend these 4 books for anyone to read, especially if you are
searching for a greater understanding of mental health in society and an
accurate portrayal of various mental illnesses. I promise that you will be
entertained, moved, and learn more about the human mind and all of its
brilliance and faults after reading any of these interesting novels described
above.

<style>
br {
   display: block;
   margin: 10px 0;
}
h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6{
   margin-top:20px;
   line-height: 30px;
   margin-bottom:10px;
}
</style>
