---
title: Mental Health Through the Media Lens
author: Smitii Nayak
editor: Brooke Thimmig
categories: [Blog]
---

When *13 Reasons Why* was released, the TV show was the talk of the town with a
viewership of at least 5 million. Based on a book about a teenage high school
student who suffered from depression and took her own life, the show made
headlines for all the wrong reasons. While attempting to bring more awareness
towards depression and mental health, the show was only successful in
glamorizing depression and suicide. In fact, there was actually an increase in
the number of online searches for 'how to commit suicide' following the show's
release.

Yet, *13 Reasons Why* was definitely an upgrade from the way mental health has
been portrayed throughout the media in the past. The show at least aimed to
make people more conscious towards those suffering from mental illnesses, and
it demonstrated the devastating impact that suicide has on a community.
Standard media usually does the exact opposite of this by creating a very
dreary and taboo image of mental health issues which skew audience members
towards stigmatizing and trivializing them.

Media platforms today play a vital role in shaping public opinion and most
people's negative image of mental illness. This is because of a trend of
incorrect, one-sided, biased, and bigoted representation of mental health by
nearly all forms of the media, from films to newspapers to social networking
sites. To date, mental health patients have been written off as damaged
individuals, and in a way, inferior to others. The media has painted social
stigma all over them by showing them as tainted people who are outcasts and not
the same as 'normal' people.

When covering mental health issues, the media has presented people suffering
from mental illnesses like schizophrenia as dangerous humans who must be
isolated from others. Rather than focusing on the illness itself, they focus on
the individual as an abnormal entity while deeming their symptomatic and
behavioural tendencies as deliberate and 'scary' or 'crazy.' Naturally, viewers
of such content tend to assign the blame to the person for their illness. In
the end, the victim is criticized for what is actually out of their control.

A very common characteristic in the media's portrayal is the generalization
that each and every person with a particular mental illness behaves the same
way. Those suffering from depression always have suicidal tendencies, and
everyone with schizophrenia hallucinates. The illnesses also never seem to have
any treatment and are 'unrecoverable from', while in reality, support can be
always be provided and a helping hand can be lent to aid mentally ill people in
getting back to full health.

Mental health is also presented as less important than physical health and
isn't given the concern it deserves, and the media doesn't do much to assist
with this harmful perception. Time and again, the importance of maintaining
good mental health is trivialized and isn't shown to its full severity. The
consequences are hidden and the gravity of the situation is buried under the
simplicity with which mental health problems are exhibited by the media
distributors.

People with anorexia, an eating disorder that has a higher death rate than any
other, feel like their condition is made to seem hardly half as serious as it
really is. Those suffering from Obsessive Compulsive Disorder are simply shown
as perfectionists often leaving their obsessive natures that drive these
compulsions unnoticed.

The key takeaway from all of this is that the media overlooks these problems
that are actual, clinically diagnosed illnesses and should instead, provide
proper coverage and realistic portrayals of mental health in order to correctly
educate media consumers. The media needs to learn how to present mental health
illnesses accurately with the help of mental health professionals, such as
specialists and psychiatrists. It is through the spread of complete awareness
that people will understand the importance of mental health and the brutality
of these illnesses that have the ability to severely cripple people. With
knowledge and understanding, we can help those suffering, protect them from
judgemental eyes, and get them on the road to recovery.

