---
title: "Social Media and Its Impact"
subtitle: We Want to be Everywhere but End Up Nowhere!
author: Nivi
editor: Brooke Thimmig
categories: [Blog]
---

As most of our lives now exist more online than offline, it's worth assessing
if we are really heading in the right direction.

How much of our 'awake' hours are spent staring at our screens in social media
environments such as Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter? According to a survey,
people may spend more than five hours a day browsing these sites!

There is a certain reality associated with our online presence these days: it
started off as 'good to have' and has now become a necessity.

## *Are we overdoing social media?*

Between 2004 (the inception of Facebook) and 2014, the number of Facebook users
went from 1 million to 1.2 billion. Given that every person we know holds a
Facebook account, this is a relatable statistic. What is so intriguing about
this finding and social media sites like facebook is why we feel the need to be
so connected and present online.

There is no doubt that social media has conquered geographical distances and
made communication so much more accessible and easier.

Somewhere along the way though, social media has replaced what was once the
only way to interact- in person.

Online posts and photos have dislodged the need to catch up with friends in
person, leading to the creation of a void that we are only now starting to
realize.

## *How important is social media validation?*

'It's not', is what every neutral person would say; however, the statistics
show otherwise. According to a study, the majority of Millennials check their
phones upto 150 times a day in order to gain instant gratification from social
media posts specifically. This sense of superficial validation is everything
that is wrong with social media today.

We now have a term, 'Nomophobia', which is a condition where you get anxiety at
the thought of being without a mobile phone. Given that browsing of social
media is one of the main tasks performed by us on our smartphones, one could
say that nomophobia essentially means that we are are scared of being deprived
of social media. Social media, or lack thereof, is now a cause of anxiety. What
was once an insignificant and fun luxury, is now a reason to lose sleep at
night.

Research psychologists who study human interaction with technology argue that
'likes' received on Instagram and Facebook are a legitimate source of dopamine-
a neurotransmitter responsible for pleasure. Again, joy, which was once only
derived from purely natural activities like sex, laughter, sport, and exercise
is now also present in our lives from the most unexpected source. Some would
say, "why not use social media? It makes us happier," but this is not always
the case. Social media has an equally strong negative result when you don't
constantly receive the validation or attention that it brings.

## *Have we come too far?*

Given that we are now a race of individuals permanently dependent on
technology, the part of the situation we can control is how we react to this
reliance.

I am still one to argue that our children do not need iPads to learn in school.
Conventional classroom teaching techniques involving face to face student to
teacher interactions, without any involvement of iPads or laptops, produced
some very capable people in the generations that proceed us that went on to do
great things. There is no denying the fact that technology has eased some of
the burden off of teachers. Correcting assignments, designing exam papers,
analysing results, and submitting homework have all become far quicker and more
efficient with the help of technology. But today, we have students who check
their phones more often during a math class than their textbooks, as attention
spans have shortened drastically since the advent of smartphones. Most of us
are not living in the current moment, and instead, we are consumed with the
artificial reality that social media has created for us. The ability and
ambition to be able to conquer, acquire, become, or purchase the next best
thing takes up so much of our restless minds, and we are slowly wanting to be
everywhere, but we end up nowhere and alone with nothing but our phones.
